1. Data Loading
The project involves loading the following datasets:

Gene Expression Data: Gene_Expression_Data.xlsx
Contains expression levels of genes across multiple samples.
Gene Information: Gene_Information.csv
Provides metadata for each gene, including chromosome location and gene name.
Sample Information: Sample_Information.tsv
Details sample phenotypes (Tumor or Normal) and associated metadata.
2. Data Preprocessing
Column names in the gene expression data are updated to reflect the phenotype (Tumor or Normal) based on the sample information.
The data is split into two subsets: Tumor and Normal samples.
3. Analysis Workflow
Average Expression Calculation:
Compute the average expression for all genes in tumor and normal samples separately.
Fold Change Computation:
Calculate the log2 fold change for each gene as log2((Tumor - Normal) / Normal).
Significant Gene Filtering:
Identify genes with fold change magnitude > 5.
Annotation:
Add metadata (chromosome location) to significant genes and annotate whether they are upregulated in Tumor or Normal samples.
4. Exploratory Data Analysis
Fold Change Distribution: Histogram of fold change values for significant genes.
Chromosomal Distribution:
Histogram of significant genes by chromosome.
Histogram segregated by phenotype (Tumor or Normal).
Upregulated vs. Downregulated Analysis:
Bar chart showing percentages of genes upregulated in Tumor and downregulated in Normal samples.
Heatmap:
Visualization of gene expression across samples for the most variable genes.
Clustermap:
Hierarchical clustering of gene expression data.
Visualizations
The following plots are generated as part of the analysis:

Fold Change Histogram: Distribution of fold changes for significant genes.
Chromosomal DEGs: Bar plots illustrating the distribution of differentially expressed genes across chromosomes.
Expression Type Analysis: Proportion of upregulated and downregulated genes.
Heatmap: Expression patterns of the top 1,000 most variable genes across samples.
Clustermap: Clustered heatmap showing relationships among genes and samples.
Findings
Differential Gene Expression:
Significant differences between Tumor and Normal samples are observed, with many genes upregulated in Tumor samples.
Chromosomal Enrichment:
Certain chromosomes exhibit a higher density of significant genes.
Distinct Expression Patterns:
Heatmaps and clustering analyses highlight clear separation between Tumor and Normal samples, with co-regulated gene clusters pointing to shared biological pathways.
Dependencies
Required R Libraries:
readxl
ggplot2
pheatmap
dplyr
tidyr
To install these packages, use the following R command:

R
Copy code
install.packages(c("readxl", "ggplot2", "pheatmap", "dplyr", "tidyr"))
 to Run
Clone this repository or download the project files.
Place the input files (Gene_Expression_Data.xlsx, Gene_Information.csv, and Sample_Information.tsv) in the project directory.
Open and run the R script (analysis_script.R) in an R environment.
Reviewing  the output visualizations and summaries generated by the script.

